Blog article on "Demystifying activator on the data path" (#5709)
knative/docs: blog/docs/articles/demystifying-activator-on-path.md

> # Demystifying Activator on path

Reviewer: after reading the full text, it might be good to add the generic concept before going into the details. Something like

The activator acts as a component on the data-path to enable traffic buffering when a service is scaled-to-zero. One lesser known feature of activator is, that it can act as a request buffer that handles back-pressure with the goal to not overload a Knative service. For this, a Knative service can define how much traffic it can handle using annotations (link to docs here). The autoscaler component will use this information to calculate the amount of pods needed to handle the incoming traffic for a specific Knative service.

**Author: [Stavros Kontopoulos](https://twitter.com/s_kontopoulos), Principal Software Engineer @ RedHat**

**Date: 2023-10-11**

_In this blog post you will learn how to recognize when activator is on the data path and what it triggers that behavior._

> A knative service can operate in two modes:proxy mode and serve mode.

Reviewer: nit: Knative
and add a blank after `:`

> A knative service can operate in two modes:proxy mode and serve mode.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A knative service can operate in two modes: proxy mode and serve mode.
```

> When in proxy mode Activator is on the data path and it will stay on path until certain conditions are met.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When in proxy mode, Activator is on the data path, and it will stay on the path until certain conditions (more on this later) are met.
```

> When these conditions are met Activator is removed from the path and the service transitions to serve mode.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When these conditions are met, Activator is removed from the data path, and the service transitions to serve mode.
```

> Although it was not always like that when a service scales from/to zero activator is added by default to the path.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
However, it was not always like that when a service scales from/to zero, the activator is added by default to the data path.
```

> Although it was not always like that when a service scales from/to zero activator is added by default to the path.

Author: done

This default setting often confuses users for reasons we will see next as it is possible that activator will not

> be removed unless enough capacity is available. This is intended as one of the Activator's roles is to offer backpressure capabilities so that it can make sure that a service could serve the traffic.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
be removed unless enough capacity is available. This is intended as one of the Activator's roles is to offer backpressure capabilities so that a Knative service is not overloaded by incoming traffic.
```

> be removed unless enough capacity is available. This is intended as one of the Activator's roles is to offer backpressure capabilities so that it can make sure that a service could serve the traffic.

Author: done

## Background

> The default pod autoscaler in Knative (KPA) is a sophisticated algorithm that uses metrics from pods to

Author: done

> calculate metrics and make scaling decisions. Let's see in detail what happens when a new Knative service is created.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
make scaling decisions. Let's see in detail what happens when a new Knative service is created.
```

> Once the user creates a new service the corresponding Knative reconciler creates a Knative Configuration and a Knative Route for that service. Then the Configuration reconciler creates a Revision resource and

Reviewer: Maybe use the backtick `` format for CRs?

the reconciler for the latter will create a Pod Autoscaler(PA) resource along with the K8s deployment for the service.
The Route reconciler will create the ingress resource that will be picked up by the Knative net-* components responsible
for managing traffic locally in the cluster and externally to the cluster.

Now the creation of the PA earlier triggers the KPA reconciler which goes through certain steps in order to setup an autoscaling configuration for the revision:

- creates an internal Decider resource that holds the initial desired scale in `decider.Status.DesiredScale`and
sets up a pod scaler via the multi-scaler component. The pod scaler every two seconds calculates a new Scale

> result and makes a decision based on the condition `decider.Status.DesiredScale != sRes.DesiredPodCount` whether to trigger a new reconciliation for the KPA reconciler. Goal is the KPA to get the latest scale result.

Author: `scaleResult` I will clarify

- creates a Metric resource that triggers the metrics collector controller to setup a scraper for the revision pods.

> - calls a scale method that decides the number of wanted pods and also updates the revision deployment

Author: The K8s raw deployment that corresponds to the revision.

> - creates/updates a ServerlessService (SKS) that holds info about the operation mode (proxy or serve) and stores the activators used in proxy mode. That SKS create/update event triggers a reconciliation for the SKS from its specific controller that creates the required public and private K8s services so traffic can be routed to the K8s deployment.

Reviewer: > activators used in proxy mode.

can you elaborate on this more?

This in combination with the networking setup done by the net-* components is the

- updates the PA and reports the active and wanted pods in its status

## Capacity and Operation Modes in Practice

> As described earlier Activator will be removed if enough capacity is available and there is an invariant that needs to

Reviewer: Can you reword this a bit? its pretty hard to read and comprehend

Author: yeah there are some diagrams missing, visually it is easier to understand but in general people need to go through some concepts for good or bad so it can be simplified to some extent.

  name: autoscale-go
spec:
  template:
    metadata:
      annotations:
        autoscaling.knative.dev/target: "10"
        autoscaling.knative.dev/target-burst-capacity: "10"
    spec:
      containers:
      - image: ghcr.io/knative/autoscale-go:latest
```

Initially when the ksvc was deployed there was no traffic and one pod is created by default for verification reasons.

Until the pod is up we have:
```bash
$ kubectl get sks
NAME                 MODE    ACTIVATORS   SERVICENAME          PRIVATESERVICENAME           READY     REASON
autoscale-go-00001   Proxy   2            autoscale-go-00001   autoscale-go-00001-private   Unknown   NoHealthyBackends
```
When the pod is up we have:

```bash
$ oc get po
NAME                                             READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
autoscale-go-00001-deployment-6cc679b9d6-xgrkf   2/2     Running   0          24s

$ oc get sks
NAME                 MODE    ACTIVATORS   SERVICENAME          PRIVATESERVICENAME           READY   REASON
autoscale-go-00001   Serve   2            autoscale-go-00001   autoscale-go-00001-private   True    
```

The reason why we are in Serve mode is because EBC=0. In the logs we get:

```bash

> {"severity":"DEBUG","timestamp":"2023-10-10T15:29:37.241575214Z","logger":"autoscaler","caller":"scaling/autoscaler.go:286","message":"PodCount=1 Total1PodCapacity=10.000 ObsStableValue=0.000 ObsPanicValue=0.000 TargetBC=10.000 ExcessBC=0.000","commit":"f1617ef","knative.dev/key":"default/autoscale-go-00001"}

Reviewer: Maybe extract the message bits from the JSON log or format the json. its a bit hard to read in a blog-post.
Same for the log lines below.

Author: Yes it was mostly dumped here for reference.

```

EBC = 10 - 0 - 10 = 0

> Note that due to the fact that there is no traffic we see no observations during panic or stable windows.

Reviewer: You might need to explain stable / panic window before this?

Since there is no traffic we scale back to zero and sks is back to proxy mode:

```bash
$ kubectl get sks
NAME                 MODE    ACTIVATORS   SERVICENAME          PRIVATESERVICENAME           READY     REASON
autoscale-go-00001   Proxy   2            autoscale-go-00001   autoscale-go-00001-private   Unknown   NoHealthyBackends
```

> In debug mode also in the logs you can see the state that the autoscaler operates for the specific revision.

Reviewer: maybe

"when you enable debug logs, you can see this also in the autoscaler logs"

In this case we go directly to:

```
{"severity":"DEBUG","timestamp":"2023-10-10T15:29:37.241523364Z","logger":"autoscaler","caller":"scaling/autoscaler.go:247","message":"Operating in stable mode.","commit":"f1617ef","knative.dev/key":"default/autoscale-go-00001"}
```

Let's send some traffic (experiment was run on Minikube):

```bash
hey -z 600s -c 20 -q 1 -host "autoscale-go.default.example.com" "http://192.168.39.43:32718?sleep=1000"
```

> Initially activator when get a request in it sends stats to the autoscaler which tries to

Reviewer: Can you reword this a bit?

```

```
{"severity":"INFO","timestamp":"2023-10-10T15:32:56.432854252Z","logger":"autoscaler","caller":"kpa/kpa.go:188","message":"Observed pod counts=kpa.podCounts{want:1, ready:0, notReady:1, pending:1, terminating:0}","commit":"f1617ef","knative.dev/controller":"knative.dev.serving.pkg.reconciler.autoscaling.kpa.Reconciler","knative.dev/kind":"autoscaling.internal.knative.dev.PodAutoscaler","knative.dev/traceid":"7988492e-eea3-4d19-bf5a-8762cf5ff8eb","knative.dev/key":"default/autoscale-go-00001"}

{"severity":"DEBUG","timestamp":"2023-10-10T15:32:57.241052566Z","logger":"autoscaler","caller":"scaling/autoscaler.go:286","message":"PodCount=0 Total1PodCapacity=10.000 ObsStableValue=19.874 ObsPanicValue=19.874 TargetBC=10.000 ExcessBC=-30.000","commit":"f1617ef","knative.dev/key":"default/autoscale-go-00001"}
```

Since the pod is not up yet: EBS = 0*10 - floor(19.874) - 10 = -30

> Given the new statistics kpa decides to scale to 3 pods.

Reviewer: maybe add, "as one pod is set to a target of 10 requests"

```
{"severity":"INFO","timestamp":"2023-10-10T15:32:57.241421042Z","logger":"autoscaler","caller":"kpa/scaler.go:370","message":"Scaling from 1 to 3","commit":"f1617ef","knative.dev/controller":"knative.dev.serving.pkg.reconciler.autoscaling.kpa.Reconciler","knative.dev/kind":"autoscaling.internal.knative.dev.PodAutoscaler","knative.dev/traceid":"6dcf87c9-15d8-41d3-95ae-5ca9b3d90705","knative.dev/key":"default/autoscale-go-00001"}
```

> But let's see why is this so. The log above comes from the multi-scaler which reports

Reviewer: But let's see why is this is the case.

a scaled result that contains EBS as reported above and a desired pod count for different windows.

Roughly the final desired number is (there is more logic that covers corner
  cases and checking against min/max scale limits):

```
dspc := math.Ceil(observedStableValue / spec.TargetValue)
dppc := math.Ceil(observedPanicValue / spec.TargetValue)
```

The target value is the utilization in terms of concurrency and that is is 0.7*(revision_target).
In this case this is 7. So we have for example for the panic window: ceil(19.874/7)=3

> **Note:** if RPS is used then the utilization factor is 0.75.

Reviewer: That might need more explaining

When in proxy mode, the activator is on the data path (which means the incoming requests are routed through the activator component), and it will stay on the path until certain conditions are met (more on this later).
If these conditions are met, the activator will be removed from the data path, and the service will transition to serve mode.
For example, when a service scales from/to zero, the activator is added to the data path by default.
This default setting often confuses users, as the activator will not be removed from the path unless enough capacity is available.
This is by intention, as one of the activator's roles (as mentioned above) is to offer back pressure capabilities so that a Knative service is not overloaded by incoming traffic.

## Background

The default pod autoscaler in Knative (KPA) is a sophisticated algorithm that uses metrics from pods to make scaling decisions.
Let's see in detail what happens when a new Knative service is created.

Once the user creates a new service the corresponding Knative reconciler creates a Knative `Configuration` and a Knative `Route` for that service. 

> Then the Configuration reconciler creates a `Revision` resource and the reconciler for the latter will create a Pod Autoscaler(PA) resource along with the K8s deployment for the service.

Reviewer: nit: Pod Autoscaler (could be `PodAutoscaler`)

> The Route reconciler will create the `Ingress` resource that will be picked up by the Knative net-* components responsible for managing traffic locally in the cluster and externally to the cluster.

Reviewer: maybe explain net-*?

  The number of activators specified in the SKS depends on the capacity that needs to be covered.

- updates the PA and reports the active and wanted pods in the PA's status

!!! note

    The SKS create/update event above triggers a reconciliation for the SKS from its specific controller that creates the required public and private K8s services so traffic can be routed to the raw K8s deployment.
    Also, in the proxy mode, the SKS controller will pick up the number of activators and configure an equal number of endpoints for the revision's [public service](https://github.com/knative/serving/blob/main/docs/scaling/SYSTEM.md#data-flow-examples).
    In combination with the networking setup done by a Knative networking component (driven by the Ingress resource), this is roughly the end-to-end networking setup that needs to happen for a ksvc to be ready to serve traffic.
    The Knative networking component can be any of the following: net-istio, net-kourier, net-contour, and net-gateway-api.

## Capacity and Operation Modes in Practice

> As described earlier, the activator will be removed from the path, assuming enough capacity is available. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
As described earlier, the activator will be removed from the path if enough capacity is available. 
```

Let's see how this capacity is calculated, but before that, let's introduce two concepts: the `panic` and `stable` windows.

> The `panic` window is the time duration that denotes a lack of capacity to serve the traffic. It happens usually with a sudden burst of traffic.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The panic window is the time duration that denotes a lack of capacity to serve the traffic. It happens usually with a sudden burst of traffic.
```

The condition that describes when to enter the panic mode and start the panic window is:

```
dppc/readyPodsCount >= spec.PanicThreshold
```
where
```
dppc := math.Ceil(observedPanicValue / spec.TargetValue)
```

The `dppc` stands for desired panic pod count and expresses what autoscaler needs to achieve in panic mode.

> The target value is the utilization in terms of concurrency that the autoscaler aims for and that is calculated as 0.7*(revision_total).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The target value is the utilization in terms of concurrency that the autoscaler aims for and that is calculated as `0.7*(revision_total)`.
```

Revision total is the maximum possible value of the scaling metric that is permitted on the pod and defaults to 100 (container concurrency default).
The value 0.7 is the utilization factor for each replica and when that is reached we need to scale out.

> **Note:** if the KPA metric Requests Per Second(RPS) is used then the utilization factor is 0.75.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
!!! note
    If the KPA metric Requests Per Second(RPS) is used then the utilization factor is 0.75.
```

The `observedPanicValue` is the calculated average value seen during the panic window for the concurrency metric.
The panic threshold is configurable (default 2) and expresses the ratio of desired versus available pods.

After we enter panic mode in order to exit we need to have enough capacity for a period that is equal to the stable window size.
That also means that the autoscaler will try to get enough pods ready in order to increase the capacity.
Also, note here that when operating outside the panic mode the autoscaler does not use `dpcc` but a similar quantity:
`dspc := math.Ceil(observedStableValue / spec.TargetValue)` which is based on metrics during the stable period.

> To quantify the idea of enough capacity and to deal with bursts of traffic we introduce the notion of the Excess Burst Capacity(EBC) that needs to be >=0.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To quantify the idea of enough capacity and to deal with bursts of traffic we introduce the notion of the Excess Burst Capacity(EBC) that needs to be nonnegative.
```

It is defined as:

```

> EBC = TotalCapacity - ObservedPanicValue - TargetBurstCapacity(TBC).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
EBC = TotalCapacity - ObservedPanicValue - TargetBurstCapacity
```

```

> `TotalCapacity` is calculated as ready_pod_count*revision_total. The default TBC is set to 200. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`TotalCapacity` is calculated as `ready_pod_count*revision_total`. The default `TargetBurstCapacity` (TBC) is set to 200. 
```

> For the Knative Autoscaler it holds the following.

Reviewer 3: unclear what the following refers to here... I'm assuming the important box, but I also usually assume those boxes are digressions from the main text...

$ kubectl get sks
NAME                 MODE    ACTIVATORS   SERVICENAME          PRIVATESERVICENAME           READY   REASON
autoscale-go-00001   Serve   2            autoscale-go-00001   autoscale-go-00001-private   True    
```

The reason why we are in Serve mode is that because EBC=0. When you enable debug logs, in the logs you get:

```
  ...
  "timestamp": "2023-10-10T15:29:37.241575214Z",
  "logger": "autoscaler",
  "message": "PodCount=1 Total1PodCapacity=10.000 ObsStableValue=0.000 ObsPanicValue=0.000 TargetBC=10.000 ExcessBC=0.000",
```

EBC = 10 - 0 - 10 = 0

Note that due to the fact that there is no traffic we see no observations during panic or stable windows.

Since there is no traffic we scale back to zero and sks is back to proxy mode:

```bash
$ kubectl get sks
NAME                 MODE    ACTIVATORS   SERVICENAME          PRIVATESERVICENAME           READY     REASON
autoscale-go-00001   Proxy   2            autoscale-go-00001   autoscale-go-00001-private   Unknown   NoHealthyBackends
```

Let's send some traffic.

```bash
hey -z 600s -c 20 -q 1 -host "autoscale-go.default.example.com" "http://192.168.39.43:32718?sleep=1000"
```

!!! note 
     

>      The experiment was run on Minikube and the [hey](https://github.com/rakyll/hey) tool was used for generating the traffic.

Reviewer 3: I would move this note to right around the graphs, as that's the first place that results / data are mentioned

> Initially activator when receives a request, sends stats to the autoscaler which tries to scale from zero based on some initial scale (default 1):

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Initially when the activator receives a request, it sends stats to the autoscaler which tries to scale from zero based on some initial scale (default 1):
```

   "message":"Received stat message: {Key:default/autoscale-go-00001 Stat:{PodName:activator-59dff6d45c-9rdxh AverageConcurrentRequests:18.873756322609804 AverageProxiedConcurrentRequests:0 RequestCount:19 ProxiedRequestCount:0 ProcessUptime:0 Timestamp:0}}",
   "address":":8080"

   ...
   "timestamp":"2023-10-10T15:32:56.432854252Z",
   "logger":"autoscaler",
   "caller":"kpa/kpa.go:188",
   "message":"Observed pod counts=kpa.podCounts{want:1, ready:0, notReady:1, pending:1, terminating:0}",

   ...
   "timestamp":"2023-10-10T15:32:57.241052566Z",
   "logger":"autoscaler",
   "message":"PodCount=0 Total1PodCapacity=10.000 ObsStableValue=19.874 ObsPanicValue=19.874 TargetBC=10.000 ExcessBC=-30.000",
```
Since the pod is not up yet: EBC = 0*10 - floor(19.874) - 10 = -30

Given the new statistics kpa decides to scale to 3 pods at some point.

```
  "timestamp": "2023-10-10T15:32:57.241421042Z",
  "logger": "autoscaler",
  "message": "Scaling from 1 to 3",
```

But let's see why is this is the case. The log above comes from the multi-scaler which reports a scaled result that contains EBC as reported above and a desired pod count for different windows.

> Roughly the final desired number is (there is more logic that covers corner cases and checking against min/max scale limits)
> derived from the dppc we saw earlier.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Roughly the final desired number is derived from the dppc we saw earlier (there is more logic that covers corner cases and checking against min/max scale limits).
```

> In this case the target value is 0.7*10=10. So we have for example for the panic window: dppc=ceil(19.874/7)=3

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In this case the target value is 0.7*10=10. So we have for example for the panic window: `dppc=ceil(19.874/7)=3`
```

As metrics get stabilized and revision is scaled enough we have:

```
  "timestamp": "2023-10-10T15:33:01.320912032Z",
  "logger": "autoscaler",
  "caller": "kpa/kpa.go:158",
  "message": "SKS should be in Serve mode: want = 3, ebc = 0, #act's = 2 PA Inactive? = false",
  
  ...
  "logger": "autoscaler",
  "caller": "scaling/autoscaler.go:286",
  "message": "PodCount=3 Total1PodCapacity=10.000 ObsStableValue=16.976 ObsPanicValue=15.792 TargetBC=10.000 ExcessBC=4.000",
```

EBC = 3*10 - floor(15.792) - 10 = 4

> Then when we reach the required pod count and metrics are stable we get EBC=3*10 - floor(19.968) - 10=0:
> 
> ```
>   "timestamp": "2023-10-10T15:33:59.24118625Z",
>   "logger": "autoscaler",
>   "message": "PodCount=3 Total1PodCapacity=10.000 ObsStableValue=19.602 ObsPanicValue=19.968 TargetBC=10.000 ExcessBC=0.000",
> ```
> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Then when we reach the required pod count and metrics are stable we get:

```
  "timestamp": "2023-10-10T15:33:59.24118625Z",
  "logger": "autoscaler",
  "message": "PodCount=3 Total1PodCapacity=10.000 ObsStableValue=19.602 ObsPanicValue=19.968 TargetBC=10.000 ExcessBC=0.000",
```

EBC=3*10 - floor(19.968) - 10=0

```

Reviewer 3: the formatting is weird here due to the multiple blocks, but general idea was to move the EBC calc after the logs, to make the structure the same as the other sections

  name: autoscale-go
spec:
  template:
    metadata:
      annotations:
        autoscaling.knative.dev/target: "10"
        autoscaling.knative.dev/target-burst-capacity: "10"
    spec:
      containers:
      - image: ghcr.io/knative/autoscale-go:latest
```

The scenario we are going to demonstrate is deploye the ksvc, let it scale down to zero and then send traffic for 10 minutes.
We then collect the logs from the autoscaler and visualize the EBC, ready pods and panic mode over time.
The graphs are shown next.

![Excess burst capacity over time](/blog/articles/images/ebc.png)
![Ready pods over time](/blog/articles/images/readypods.png)
![Panic mode over time](/blog/articles/images/panic.png)

Let's describe in detail what we see above. Initially when the ksvc is deployed there is no traffic and one pod is created by default for verification reasons.

Until the pod is up we have:
```bash
$ kubectl get sks
NAME                 MODE    ACTIVATORS   SERVICENAME          PRIVATESERVICENAME           READY     REASON
autoscale-go-00001   Proxy   2            autoscale-go-00001   autoscale-go-00001-private   Unknown   NoHealthyBackends
```
When the pod is up we have:

```bash

> $ oc get po

Reviewer 3: nit: probably should stick with either kubectl or oc for these commands

Author: Oups :) Yeah makes sense.

NAME                                             READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
autoscale-go-00001-deployment-6cc679b9d6-xgrkf   2/2     Running   0          24s

$ oc get sks
NAME                 MODE    ACTIVATORS   SERVICENAME          PRIVATESERVICENAME           READY   REASON
autoscale-go-00001   Serve   2            autoscale-go-00001   autoscale-go-00001-private   True    
```

The reason why we are in Serve mode is that because EBC=0. When you enable debug logs, in the logs you get:

```
  "severity": "DEBUG",
  "timestamp": "2023-10-10T15:29:37.241575214Z",
  "logger": "autoscaler",
  "caller": "scaling/autoscaler.go:286",
  "message": "PodCount=1 Total1PodCapacity=10.000 ObsStableValue=0.000 ObsPanicValue=0.000 TargetBC=10.000 ExcessBC=0.000",
  "commit": "f1617ef",

>   "knative.dev/key": "default/autoscale-go-00001"

Reviewer 3: may want to consider filtering out parts here that aren't relevant to what you want to show, as they might obscure the info you want to highlight to the reader

Author: I cleaned up the log msgs.

```

EBC = 10 - 0 - 10 = 0

Note that due to the fact that there is no traffic we see no observations during panic or stable windows.

Since there is no traffic we scale back to zero and sks is back to proxy mode:

```bash
$ kubectl get sks
NAME                 MODE    ACTIVATORS   SERVICENAME          PRIVATESERVICENAME           READY     REASON
autoscale-go-00001   Proxy   2            autoscale-go-00001   autoscale-go-00001-private   Unknown   NoHealthyBackends
```

> Let's send some traffic (experiment was run on Minikube):

Reviewer 3: maybe mention that you'll be using `hey` to send that traffic (with a link to the tool, as some readers might not know what it is)
